README.adoc, before:

////
- Copyright (c) 2019-2024, Arm Limited and Contributors
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
////
= Vulkan Samples
// omit in toc
:pp: {plus}{plus}
ifndef::site-gen-antora[]
:toc:
endif::[]

image::banner.jpg[Vulkan Samples banner]

ifndef::site-gen-antora[]
== Renaming Default Branch

We have recently transitioned the repository to use the `main` branch by default.
All remote git usage is handled automatically.
To update your local repository to use main please use the following commands

----
git branch -m master main && git fetch origin && git branch -u origin/main main && git remote set-head origin -a
----
endif::[]

== Introduction

The Vulkan Samples is collection of resources to help you develop optimized Vulkan applications.

If you are new to Vulkan the xref:samples/api/README.adoc[API samples] are the right place to start.
Additionally you may find the following links useful:

ifdef::site-gen-antora[]
* xref:guide:ROOT:index.adoc[Vulkan Guide]
* xref:tutorial:ROOT:00_Introduction.adoc[Get Started in Vulkan]
endif::[]

ifndef::site-gen-antora[]
* https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Guide[Vulkan Guide]
* https://vulkan-tutorial.com/[Get Started in Vulkan]
endif::[]

xref:samples/performance/README.adoc[Performance samples] show the recommended best practice together with real-time profiling information.
They are more advanced but also contain a detailed tutorial with more in-detail explanations.

=== Goals

* Create a collection of resources that demonstrate best-practice recommendations in Vulkan
* Create tutorials that explain the implementation of best-practices and include performance analysis guides
* Create a xref:framework/README.adoc[framework] that can be used as reference material and also as a sandbox for advanced experimentation with Vulkan

== Samples

* xref:./samples/README.adoc[Listing of all samples available in this repository]

== General information

* *Project Basics*
 ** xref:./docs/misc.adoc#controls[Controls]
 ** xref:./docs/misc.adoc#debug-window[Debug window]
 ** xref:./scripts/README.adoc[Create a Sample]
* *Vulkan Essentials*
 ** xref:./samples/vulkan_basics.adoc[How does Vulkan compare to OpenGL ES?
What should you expect when targeting Vulkan?]
* *Misc*
 ** xref:./docs/misc.adoc#driver-version[Driver version]
 ** xref:./docs/memory_limits.adoc[Memory limits]

== Setup

Prerequisites: https://git-scm.com/downloads[git] with https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/working-with-files/managing-large-files/installing-git-large-file-storage[git large file storage (git-lfs)].

Clone the repo with submodules using the following command:

----
git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples.git
cd Vulkan-Samples
----

Follow build instructions for your platform below.

== Build

=== Supported Platforms

* Windows - xref:./docs/build.adoc#windows[Build Guide]
* Linux - xref:./docs/build.adoc#linux[Build Guide]
* macOS - xref:./docs/build.adoc#macos[Build Guide]
* Android - xref:./docs/build.adoc#android[Build Guide]

== Usage

The following shows some example command line usage on how to configure and run the Vulkan Samples.

> Make sure that you are running the samples from the root directory of the repository.
> Otherwise the samples will not be able to find the assets.
> ./build/app/bin/<BuildType>/<Arch>/vulkan_samples

----
# For the entire usage use
vulkan_samples --help

# For subcommand usage use
vulkan_samples <sub_command> --help

# Run Swapchain Images sample
vulkan_samples sample swapchain_images

# Run AFBC sample in benchmark mode for 5000 frames
vulkan_samples sample afbc --benchmark --stop-after-frame 5000

# Run bonza test offscreen
vulkan_samples test bonza --headless

# Run all the performance samples for 10 seconds in each configuration
vulkan_samples batch --category performance --duration 10

# Run Swapchain Images sample on an Android device
adb shell am start-activity -n com.khronos.vulkan_samples/com.khronos.vulkan_samples.SampleLauncherActivity -e sample swapchain_images
----

== Tests

* System Test - xref:docs/testing.adoc#system-test[Usage Guide]
* Generate Sample - xref:docs/testing.adoc#generate-sample-test[Usage Guide]

== License

See link:LICENSE[LICENSE].

This project has some third-party dependencies, each of which may have independent licensing:

* https://github.com/ARM-software/astc-encoder[astc-encoder]: ASTC Evaluation Codec
* https://github.com/vit-vit/CTPL[CTPL]: Thread Pool Library
* https://github.com/docopt/docopt.cpp[docopt]: A C{pp}11 port of the Python argument parsing library
* https://github.com/glfw/glfw[glfw]: A multi-platform library for OpenGL, OpenGL ES, Vulkan, window and input
* https://github.com/g-truc/glm[glm]: OpenGL Mathematics
* https://github.com/KhronosGroup/glslang[glslang]: Shader front end and validator
* https://github.com/ocornut/imgui[dear imgui]: Immediate Mode Graphical User Interface
* https://github.com/ARM-software/HWCPipe[HWCPipe]: Interface to mobile Hardware Counters
* https://github.com/KhronosGroup/KTX-Software[KTX-Software]: Khronos Texture Library and Tools
* https://github.com/gabime/spdlog[spdlog]: Fast C{pp} logging library
* https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SPIRV-Cross[SPIRV-Cross]: Parses and converts SPIR-V to other shader languages
* https://github.com/nothings/stb[stb]: Single-file public domain (or MIT licensed) libraries
* https://github.com/syoyo/tinygltf[tinygltf]: Header only C{pp}11 glTF 2.0 file parser
* https://github.com/nlohmann/json[nlohmann json]: C{pp} JSON Library (included by https://github.com/syoyo/tinygltf[tinygltf])
* https://github.com/GPUOpen-LibrariesAndSDKs/VulkanMemoryAllocator[vma]: Vulkan Memory Allocator
* https://github.com/zeux/volk[volk]: Meta loader for Vulkan API
* https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Docs[vulkan]: Sources for the formal documentation of the Vulkan API

This project uses assets from https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples-Assets[vulkan-samples-assets].
Each one has its own license.

=== Trademarks

Vulkan is a registered trademark of the Khronos Group Inc.

== Contributions

Donated to Khronos by Arm, with further contributions by Sascha Willems and Adam Sawicki.
See xref:CONTRIBUTORS.adoc[CONTRIBUTORS] for the full contributor list.

Also see xref:CONTRIBUTING.adoc[CONTRIBUTING] for contribution guidelines.

== Related resources

* https://developer.arm.com/documentation/101897/latest/[Mali GPU Best Practices]: A document with recommendations for efficient API usage

Commit message:

Add note about documentation site, remove note on renaming master to main Refs #1018

README.adoc, after:

////
- Copyright (c) 2019-2024, Arm Limited and Contributors
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
////
= Vulkan Samples
// omit in toc
:pp: {plus}{plus}
ifndef::site-gen-antora[]
:toc:
endif::[]

image::banner.jpg[Vulkan Samples banner]

ifndef::site-gen-antora[]
== Vulkan documentation site

Documentation for the samples is best viewed at the new link:https://docs.vulkan.org/samples/latest/README.html[Vulkan Documentation Site]. The documentation uses AsciiDoc which isn't fully supported by github.

endif::[]

== Introduction

The Vulkan Samples is collection of resources to help you develop optimized Vulkan applications.

If you are new to Vulkan the xref:samples/api/README.adoc[API samples] are the right place to start.
Additionally you may find the following links useful:

ifdef::site-gen-antora[]
* xref:guide:ROOT:index.adoc[Vulkan Guide]
* xref:tutorial:ROOT:00_Introduction.adoc[Get Started in Vulkan]
endif::[]

ifndef::site-gen-antora[]
* https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Guide[Vulkan Guide]
* https://vulkan-tutorial.com/[Get Started in Vulkan]
endif::[]

xref:samples/performance/README.adoc[Performance samples] show the recommended best practice together with real-time profiling information.
They are more advanced but also contain a detailed tutorial with more in-detail explanations.

=== Goals

* Create a collection of resources that demonstrate best-practice recommendations in Vulkan
* Create tutorials that explain the implementation of best-practices and include performance analysis guides
* Create a xref:framework/README.adoc[framework] that can be used as reference material and also as a sandbox for advanced experimentation with Vulkan

== Samples

* xref:./samples/README.adoc[Listing of all samples available in this repository]

== General information

* *Project Basics*
 ** xref:./docs/misc.adoc#controls[Controls]
 ** xref:./docs/misc.adoc#debug-window[Debug window]
 ** xref:./scripts/README.adoc[Create a Sample]
* *Vulkan Essentials*
 ** xref:./samples/vulkan_basics.adoc[How does Vulkan compare to OpenGL ES?
What should you expect when targeting Vulkan?]
* *Misc*
 ** xref:./docs/misc.adoc#driver-version[Driver version]
 ** xref:./docs/memory_limits.adoc[Memory limits]

== Setup

Prerequisites: https://git-scm.com/downloads[git] with https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/working-with-files/managing-large-files/installing-git-large-file-storage[git large file storage (git-lfs)].

Clone the repo with submodules using the following command:

----
git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples.git
cd Vulkan-Samples
----

Follow build instructions for your platform below.

== Build

=== Supported Platforms

* Windows - xref:./docs/build.adoc#windows[Build Guide]
* Linux - xref:./docs/build.adoc#linux[Build Guide]
* macOS - xref:./docs/build.adoc#macos[Build Guide]
* Android - xref:./docs/build.adoc#android[Build Guide]

== Usage

The following shows some example command line usage on how to configure and run the Vulkan Samples.

> Make sure that you are running the samples from the root directory of the repository.
> Otherwise the samples will not be able to find the assets.
> ./build/app/bin/<BuildType>/<Arch>/vulkan_samples

----
# For the entire usage use
vulkan_samples --help

# For subcommand usage use
vulkan_samples <sub_command> --help

# Run Swapchain Images sample
vulkan_samples sample swapchain_images

# Run AFBC sample in benchmark mode for 5000 frames
vulkan_samples sample afbc --benchmark --stop-after-frame 5000

# Run bonza test offscreen
vulkan_samples test bonza --headless

# Run all the performance samples for 10 seconds in each configuration
vulkan_samples batch --category performance --duration 10

# Run Swapchain Images sample on an Android device
adb shell am start-activity -n com.khronos.vulkan_samples/com.khronos.vulkan_samples.SampleLauncherActivity -e sample swapchain_images
----

== Tests

* System Test - xref:docs/testing.adoc#system-test[Usage Guide]
* Generate Sample - xref:docs/testing.adoc#generate-sample-test[Usage Guide]

== License

See link:LICENSE[LICENSE].

This project has some third-party dependencies, each of which may have independent licensing:

* https://github.com/ARM-software/astc-encoder[astc-encoder]: ASTC Evaluation Codec
* https://github.com/vit-vit/CTPL[CTPL]: Thread Pool Library
* https://github.com/docopt/docopt.cpp[docopt]: A C{pp}11 port of the Python argument parsing library
* https://github.com/glfw/glfw[glfw]: A multi-platform library for OpenGL, OpenGL ES, Vulkan, window and input
* https://github.com/g-truc/glm[glm]: OpenGL Mathematics
* https://github.com/KhronosGroup/glslang[glslang]: Shader front end and validator
* https://github.com/ocornut/imgui[dear imgui]: Immediate Mode Graphical User Interface
* https://github.com/ARM-software/HWCPipe[HWCPipe]: Interface to mobile Hardware Counters
* https://github.com/KhronosGroup/KTX-Software[KTX-Software]: Khronos Texture Library and Tools
* https://github.com/gabime/spdlog[spdlog]: Fast C{pp} logging library
* https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SPIRV-Cross[SPIRV-Cross]: Parses and converts SPIR-V to other shader languages
* https://github.com/nothings/stb[stb]: Single-file public domain (or MIT licensed) libraries
* https://github.com/syoyo/tinygltf[tinygltf]: Header only C{pp}11 glTF 2.0 file parser
* https://github.com/nlohmann/json[nlohmann json]: C{pp} JSON Library (included by https://github.com/syoyo/tinygltf[tinygltf])
* https://github.com/GPUOpen-LibrariesAndSDKs/VulkanMemoryAllocator[vma]: Vulkan Memory Allocator
* https://github.com/zeux/volk[volk]: Meta loader for Vulkan API
* https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Docs[vulkan]: Sources for the formal documentation of the Vulkan API

This project uses assets from https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples-Assets[vulkan-samples-assets].
Each one has its own license.

=== Trademarks

Vulkan is a registered trademark of the Khronos Group Inc.

== Contributions

Donated to Khronos by Arm, with further contributions by Sascha Willems and Adam Sawicki.
See xref:CONTRIBUTORS.adoc[CONTRIBUTORS] for the full contributor list.

Also see xref:CONTRIBUTING.adoc[CONTRIBUTING] for contribution guidelines.

== Related resources

* https://developer.arm.com/documentation/101897/latest/[Mali GPU Best Practices]: A document with recommendations for efficient API usage
