samples/extensions/README.md, before:

<!--
- Copyright (c) 2020, Arm Limited and Contributors
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
-->

# Extension samples <!-- omit in toc -->

## Contents <!-- omit in toc -->

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Samples](#samples)

## Introduction

This area of the repository contains samples that are meant to demonstrate Vulkan extension. The goal of these samples is to demonstrate how to use a given extension at the API level with as little abstraction as possible.

## Samples
- [Conservative Rasterization](./conservative_rasterization)<br/>
**Extension**: [```VK_EXT_conservative_rasterization```](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.2-extensions/html/vkspec.html#VK_EXT_conservative_rasterization)<br/>
Uses conservative rasterization to change the way fragments are generated. Enables overestimation to generate fragments for every pixel touched instead of only pixels that are fully covered.

- [Push Descriptors](./push_descriptors)<br/>
**Extension**: [```VK_KHR_push_descriptor```](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.2-extensions/html/vkspec.html#VK_KHR_push_descriptor)<br/>
Push descriptors apply the push constants concept to descriptor sets. Instead of creating per-object descriptor sets, this example passes descriptors at command buffer creation time.

- [Basic Ray Tracing (NVIDIA)](./raytracing_basic)<br/>
**Extension**: [```VK_NV_ray_tracing```](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.2-extensions/html/vkspec.html#VK_NV_ray_tracing)<br/>
Render a simple triangle using the Nvidia ray tracing extensions. Shows how to setup acceleration structures, ray tracing pipelines and the shaders required to do the actual ray tracing.

Commit message:

Add debug utilities sample to api readme

samples/extensions/README.md, after:

<!--
- Copyright (c) 2020, Arm Limited and Contributors
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
-->

# Extension samples <!-- omit in toc -->

## Contents <!-- omit in toc -->

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Samples](#samples)

## Introduction

This area of the repository contains samples that are meant to demonstrate Vulkan extension. The goal of these samples is to demonstrate how to use a given extension at the API level with as little abstraction as possible.

## Tutorials
- [Using the Debug Utilities for advanced Vulkan debugging](./debug_utils/debug_utils_tutorial.md)<br/>

## Samples
- [Conservative Rasterization](./conservative_rasterization)<br/>
**Extension**: [```VK_EXT_conservative_rasterization```](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.2-extensions/html/vkspec.html#VK_EXT_conservative_rasterization)<br/>
Uses conservative rasterization to change the way fragments are generated. Enables overestimation to generate fragments for every pixel touched instead of only pixels that are fully covered.

- [Push Descriptors](./push_descriptors)<br/>
**Extension**: [```VK_KHR_push_descriptor```](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.2-extensions/html/vkspec.html#VK_KHR_push_descriptor)<br/>
Push descriptors apply the push constants concept to descriptor sets. Instead of creating per-object descriptor sets, this example passes descriptors at command buffer creation time.

- [Debug Utilities](./debug_utils)<br/>
**Extension**: [```VK_EXT_debug_utils```](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.2-extensions/html/vkspec.html#VK_EXT_debug_utils)<br/>
Uses the debug utilities extension to name and group Vulkan objects (command buffers, images, etc.). This information makes debugging in tools like RenderDoc significantly easier.

- [Basic Ray Tracing (NVIDIA)](./raytracing_basic)<br/>
**Extension**: [```VK_NV_ray_tracing```](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.2-extensions/html/vkspec.html#VK_NV_ray_tracing)<br/>
Render a simple triangle using the Nvidia ray tracing extensions. Shows how to setup acceleration structures, ray tracing pipelines and the shaders required to do the actual ray tracing.
