samples/api/hpp_hlsl_shaders/README.adoc, before:

////
- Copyright (c) 2022-2023, The Khronos Group
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
////
= Using HLSL shaders in Vulkan with Vulkan-Hpp

This tutorial, along with the accompanying example code, shows how to use shaders written in the High Level Shading Language (HLSL) in Vulkan at runtime, using Vulkan-Hpp.

Vulkan does not directly consume shaders in a human-readable text format, but instead uses SPIR-V as an intermediate representation.
This opens the option to use shader languages other than e.g.
GLSL, as long as they can target the Vulkan SPIR-V environment.
One such language is Microsoft's HLSL, which is the shading language for DirectX.

Details on how HLSL fits into the Vulkan ecosystem can be found in  this https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Guide/blob/master/chapters/hlsl.adoc[Vulkan guide chapter].

== HLSL Syntax

HLSL is a bit more object-oriented than GLSL, but the general structure of a shader is similar Vulkan-specific functions are marked with the https://github.com/microsoft/DirectXShaderCompiler/blob/master/docs/SPIR-V.rst#the-implicit-vk-namespace[implicit `vk` namespace]:

[,hlsl]
----
struct VSInput
{
[[vk::location(0)]] float3 Pos : POSITION0;
[[vk::location(1)]] float2 UV : TEXCOORD0;
[[vk::location(2)]] float3 Normal : NORMAL0;
};

struct UBO
{
	float4x4 projection;
	float4x4 model;
	float4 viewPos;
};

cbuffer ubo : register(b0, space0) { UBO ubo; }

struct VSOutput
{
	float4 Pos : SV_POSITION;
[[vk::location(0)]] float2 UV : TEXCOORD0;
};

VSOutput main(VSInput input)
{
	VSOutput output = (VSOutput)0;
	output.UV = input.UV;
	output.Pos = mul(ubo.projection, mul(ubo.model, float4(input.Pos.xyz, 1.0)));
	return output;
}
----

== Glslang

The Vulkan samples use https://github.com/KhronosGroup/glslang[Glslang] for converting shaders to SPIR-V at runtime.
Glslang is the reference GLSL validator and translator, but also supports HLSL as an input language.

HLSL support in Glslang limited though and for a more feature complete HLSL to SPIR-V compiler, you can also use the https://github.com/microsoft/DirectXShaderCompiler[DirectX shader compiler].

For the basic shader in this tutorial, we can go with Glslang though, as it supports all features we require.

== Converting HLSL to SPIR-V

Loading HLSL with Glslang is similar to loading GLSL, but requires different parameters.
Here are the relevant parts that differ from loading HLSL from the `HlslShaders::load_hlsl_shader` function of the sample:

[,cpp]
----
std::vector<uint32_t> spirvCode;

// Use HLSL parsing rules and semantics (EShMsgReadHlsl)
EShMessages messages = static_cast<EShMessages>(EShMsgReadHlsl | ...);
...

// Language needs to be selected based on the shader stage
EShLanguage language = EShLangVertex;
glslang::TShader shader(language);
...

// Set the source language to HLSL
shader.setEnvInput(glslang::EShSourceHlsl, language, glslang::EShClientVulkan, 1);
...

// Parse the HLSL input
if (!shader.parse(&glslang::DefaultTBuiltInResource, 100, false, messages))
{
	...
}

// Add shader to new program object.
glslang::TProgram program;
program.addShader(&shader);

// Link program.
if (!program.link(messages))
{
	...
}
...

// Translate to SPIRV
glslang::TIntermediate *intermediate = program.getIntermediate(language);
...
glslang::GlslangToSpv(*intermediate, spirvCode, &logger);
...
----

=== Creating the shader module

The call to `glslang::GlslangToSpv` will generate the SPIR-V bytecode that we can use to create the Vulkan shader module from:

[,cpp]
----
vk::ShaderModuleCreateInfo module_create_info({}, spirvCode);
vk::ShaderModule           shader_module = get_device()->get_handle().createShaderModule(module_create_info);
----

Commit message:

Add higlighted block with link to the github source for each sample
The block uses a define, so it's only visible from within Antora

samples/api/hpp_hlsl_shaders/README.adoc, after:

////
- Copyright (c) 2022-2023, The Khronos Group
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
////
= Using HLSL shaders in Vulkan with Vulkan-Hpp

ifdef::site-gen-antora[]
TIP: The source for this sample can be found in the https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples/tree/main/samples/api/hpp_hlsl_shaders[Khronos Vulkan samples github repository].
endif::[]


This tutorial, along with the accompanying example code, shows how to use shaders written in the High Level Shading Language (HLSL) in Vulkan at runtime, using Vulkan-Hpp.

Vulkan does not directly consume shaders in a human-readable text format, but instead uses SPIR-V as an intermediate representation.
This opens the option to use shader languages other than e.g.
GLSL, as long as they can target the Vulkan SPIR-V environment.
One such language is Microsoft's HLSL, which is the shading language for DirectX.

Details on how HLSL fits into the Vulkan ecosystem can be found in  this https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Guide/blob/master/chapters/hlsl.adoc[Vulkan guide chapter].

== HLSL Syntax

HLSL is a bit more object-oriented than GLSL, but the general structure of a shader is similar Vulkan-specific functions are marked with the https://github.com/microsoft/DirectXShaderCompiler/blob/master/docs/SPIR-V.rst#the-implicit-vk-namespace[implicit `vk` namespace]:

[,hlsl]
----
struct VSInput
{
[[vk::location(0)]] float3 Pos : POSITION0;
[[vk::location(1)]] float2 UV : TEXCOORD0;
[[vk::location(2)]] float3 Normal : NORMAL0;
};

struct UBO
{
	float4x4 projection;
	float4x4 model;
	float4 viewPos;
};

cbuffer ubo : register(b0, space0) { UBO ubo; }

struct VSOutput
{
	float4 Pos : SV_POSITION;
[[vk::location(0)]] float2 UV : TEXCOORD0;
};

VSOutput main(VSInput input)
{
	VSOutput output = (VSOutput)0;
	output.UV = input.UV;
	output.Pos = mul(ubo.projection, mul(ubo.model, float4(input.Pos.xyz, 1.0)));
	return output;
}
----

== Glslang

The Vulkan samples use https://github.com/KhronosGroup/glslang[Glslang] for converting shaders to SPIR-V at runtime.
Glslang is the reference GLSL validator and translator, but also supports HLSL as an input language.

HLSL support in Glslang limited though and for a more feature complete HLSL to SPIR-V compiler, you can also use the https://github.com/microsoft/DirectXShaderCompiler[DirectX shader compiler].

For the basic shader in this tutorial, we can go with Glslang though, as it supports all features we require.

== Converting HLSL to SPIR-V

Loading HLSL with Glslang is similar to loading GLSL, but requires different parameters.
Here are the relevant parts that differ from loading HLSL from the `HlslShaders::load_hlsl_shader` function of the sample:

[,cpp]
----
std::vector<uint32_t> spirvCode;

// Use HLSL parsing rules and semantics (EShMsgReadHlsl)
EShMessages messages = static_cast<EShMessages>(EShMsgReadHlsl | ...);
...

// Language needs to be selected based on the shader stage
EShLanguage language = EShLangVertex;
glslang::TShader shader(language);
...

// Set the source language to HLSL
shader.setEnvInput(glslang::EShSourceHlsl, language, glslang::EShClientVulkan, 1);
...

// Parse the HLSL input
if (!shader.parse(&glslang::DefaultTBuiltInResource, 100, false, messages))
{
	...
}

// Add shader to new program object.
glslang::TProgram program;
program.addShader(&shader);

// Link program.
if (!program.link(messages))
{
	...
}
...

// Translate to SPIRV
glslang::TIntermediate *intermediate = program.getIntermediate(language);
...
glslang::GlslangToSpv(*intermediate, spirvCode, &logger);
...
----

=== Creating the shader module

The call to `glslang::GlslangToSpv` will generate the SPIR-V bytecode that we can use to create the Vulkan shader module from:

[,cpp]
----
vk::ShaderModuleCreateInfo module_create_info({}, spirvCode);
vk::ShaderModule           shader_module = get_device()->get_handle().createShaderModule(module_create_info);
----
