samples/extensions/hlsl_raytracing_basic/README.md, before:

<!--
- Copyright (c) 2020-2021, The Khronos Group 
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
-->

### Basic hardware accelerated ray tracing<br/>
**Extensions**: [```VK_KHR_ray_tracing_pipeline```](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.2-extensions/html/vkspec.html#VK_KHR_ray_tracing_pipeline), [```VK_KHR_acceleration_structure```](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.2-extensions/html/vkspec.html#VK_KHR_acceleration_structure)<br/>
Render a basic scene using the official cross-vendor ray tracing extension. Shows how to setup all data structures required for ray tracing, including the bottom and top level acceleration structures for the geometry, the shader binding table and the ray tracing pipelines with shader groups for ray generation, ray hits, and ray misses. After dispatching the rays, the final result is copied to the swapchain image.<br/>

Commit message:

Update shaders Update README fix validation layers errors

samples/extensions/hlsl_raytracing_basic/README.md, after:

<!--
- Copyright (c) 2020-2021, The Khronos Group 
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
-->

# Basic HLSL hardware accelerated ray tracing<br/>

## Overview

This sample is based on raytracing_basic sample. The only difference is using precompiled HLSL shaders instead of GLSL shaders

## HLSL shaders

HLSL shaders can be compiled by Microsoft’s DirectX shader compiler (DXC). For compiling raytracing shaders above commend can be used:
dxc.exe -fspv-target-env=vulkan1.1spirv1.4 -spirv -T lib_6_3 <path_to_raytracing_shader> -Fo <output_path>
