samples/extensions/dynamic_line_rasterization/README.adoc, before:

////
- Copyright (c) 2023, Mobica Limited
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
////

= Dynamic line rasterization

image::screenshot.png[]

== Overview

This sample demonstrates functions from various extensions related to dynamic line rasterization. These functions can be useful for developing CAD applications.

* From the `VK_EXT_line_rasterization` extension:
** `vkCmdSetLineStippleEXT` - sets the stipple pattern.
* From the `VK_EXT_extended_dynamic_state3` extension:
** `vkCmdSetPolygonModeEXT` - sets how defined primitives should be rasterized.
** `vkCmdSetLineRasterizationModeEXT` - sets the algorithm for line rasterization.
** `vkCmdSetLineStippleEnableEXT` - toggles stippling for lines.
* And also from the core Vulkan:
** `vkCmdSetLineWidth` - sets the line width.
** `vkCmdSetPrimitiveTopologyEXT` - defines which type of primitives is being drawn.

== The sample

Dynamic line rasterization contains a wireframed cube whose appearance can be modified by the user. The cube edges and filling are rendered in a single pipeline, using a different set of indices. The `vkCmdSetPrimitiveTopologyEXT` and `vkCmdSetPolygonModeEXT` functions are used to change the way they are rendered.

Users can modify the line width (`vkCmdSetLineWidth`) and choose how the line is drawn (`vkCmdSetLineRasterizationModeEXT`). The sample also demonstrates the ability to stipple the line. Stippling is defined by two variables:

** `lineStipplePattern` - a `uint16_t` where each bit represents whether a point on the line is colored (1) or transparent (0).
** `lineStippleFactor` - a factor used to determine how many consecutive points are affected by a single pattern bit.

The sample also contains a grid rendered beneath the cube using a different pipeline. This grid represents another approach to line rasterization based on the fragment shader. Consequently, the appearance of the gridlines cannot be modified by the user.

== Credits

The infinite grid shader is based on the code from the https://asliceofrendering.com/scene%20helper/2020/01/05/InfiniteGrid/[asliceofrendering.com] blog.

== Documentation links

https://registry.khronos.org/vulkan/specs/1.3-extensions/man/html/vkCmdSetLineStippleEXT.html

https://registry.khronos.org/vulkan/specs/1.3-extensions/man/html/vkCmdSetPolygonModeEXT.html

https://registry.khronos.org/vulkan/specs/1.3-extensions/man/html/vkCmdSetLineRasterizationModeEXT.html

https://registry.khronos.org/vulkan/specs/1.3-extensions/man/html/vkCmdSetLineStippleEnableEXT.html

https://registry.khronos.org/vulkan/specs/1.3-extensions/man/html/vkCmdSetLineWidth.html

Commit message:

Add higlighted block with link to the github source for each sample
The block uses a define, so it's only visible from within Antora

samples/extensions/dynamic_line_rasterization/README.adoc, after:

////
- Copyright (c) 2023, Mobica Limited
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
////

= Dynamic line rasterization

ifdef::site-gen-antora[]
TIP: The source for this sample can be found in the https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples/tree/main/samples/extensions/dynamic_line_rasterization[Khronos Vulkan samples github repository].
endif::[]


image::screenshot.png[]

== Overview

This sample demonstrates functions from various extensions related to dynamic line rasterization. These functions can be useful for developing CAD applications.

* From the `VK_EXT_line_rasterization` extension:
** `vkCmdSetLineStippleEXT` - sets the stipple pattern.
* From the `VK_EXT_extended_dynamic_state3` extension:
** `vkCmdSetPolygonModeEXT` - sets how defined primitives should be rasterized.
** `vkCmdSetLineRasterizationModeEXT` - sets the algorithm for line rasterization.
** `vkCmdSetLineStippleEnableEXT` - toggles stippling for lines.
* And also from the core Vulkan:
** `vkCmdSetLineWidth` - sets the line width.
** `vkCmdSetPrimitiveTopologyEXT` - defines which type of primitives is being drawn.

== The sample

Dynamic line rasterization contains a wireframed cube whose appearance can be modified by the user. The cube edges and filling are rendered in a single pipeline, using a different set of indices. The `vkCmdSetPrimitiveTopologyEXT` and `vkCmdSetPolygonModeEXT` functions are used to change the way they are rendered.

Users can modify the line width (`vkCmdSetLineWidth`) and choose how the line is drawn (`vkCmdSetLineRasterizationModeEXT`). The sample also demonstrates the ability to stipple the line. Stippling is defined by two variables:

** `lineStipplePattern` - a `uint16_t` where each bit represents whether a point on the line is colored (1) or transparent (0).
** `lineStippleFactor` - a factor used to determine how many consecutive points are affected by a single pattern bit.

The sample also contains a grid rendered beneath the cube using a different pipeline. This grid represents another approach to line rasterization based on the fragment shader. Consequently, the appearance of the gridlines cannot be modified by the user.

== Credits

The infinite grid shader is based on the code from the https://asliceofrendering.com/scene%20helper/2020/01/05/InfiniteGrid/[asliceofrendering.com] blog.

== Documentation links

https://registry.khronos.org/vulkan/specs/1.3-extensions/man/html/vkCmdSetLineStippleEXT.html

https://registry.khronos.org/vulkan/specs/1.3-extensions/man/html/vkCmdSetPolygonModeEXT.html

https://registry.khronos.org/vulkan/specs/1.3-extensions/man/html/vkCmdSetLineRasterizationModeEXT.html

https://registry.khronos.org/vulkan/specs/1.3-extensions/man/html/vkCmdSetLineStippleEnableEXT.html

https://registry.khronos.org/vulkan/specs/1.3-extensions/man/html/vkCmdSetLineWidth.html
