samples/extensions/memory_budget/README.adoc, before:

////
- Copyright (c) 2023, Holochip Corporation
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
////
= Memory Budget extended features

This sample demonstrates how to incorporate the Vulkan memory budget extension.
Memory budget extension helps users to sample the memory budget consumption on each heap from the `physical device`, and is able to tell the `property flag` for each heap.
Which is a proper debug tool to visualize the memory consumption in run-time.

== Memory budget extension

In order to enable usage of memory budget extension features, an instance extension and a device extension were introduced in the constructor of the `MemoryBudget` class, where:

[,cpp]
----
add_instance_extension(VK_KHR_GET_PHYSICAL_DEVICE_PROPERTIES_2_EXTENSION_NAME);
add_device_extension(VK_EXT_MEMORY_BUDGET_EXTENSION_NAME);
----

Memory properties related structure instances were defined and initialized in the header of the `MemoryBudget` class, listed as follows:

[,cpp]
----
VkPhysicalDeviceMemoryBudgetPropertiesEXT physical_device_memory_budget_properties{};
VkPhysicalDeviceMemoryProperties2 device_memory_properties{};
----

Where, the `sType` and `pNext` variables were defined inside the `initialize_device_memory_properties()` function, such that:

[,cpp]
----
void MemoryBudget::initialize_device_memory_properties()
{
	// Initialize physical device memory budget properties structures variables
	physical_device_memory_budget_properties.sType = VK_STRUCTURE_TYPE_PHYSICAL_DEVICE_MEMORY_BUDGET_PROPERTIES_EXT;
	physical_device_memory_budget_properties.pNext = nullptr;
	// Initialize physical device memory properties structure variables
	device_memory_properties.sType = VK_STRUCTURE_TYPE_PHYSICAL_DEVICE_MEMORY_PROPERTIES_2;
	device_memory_properties.pNext = &physical_device_memory_budget_properties;
}
----

The `sType` of `device_memory_properties` is defined as `VK_STRUCTURE_TYPE_PHYSICAL_DEVICE_MEMORY_PROPERTIES_2`, and its `pNext` chained in a pointer of the structure instance `physical_device_memory_budget_properties`.
Where, the `sType` of `physical_device_memory_budget_properties` is defined as `VK_STRUCTURE_TYPE_PHYSICAL_DEVICE_MEMORY_BUDGET_PROPERTIES_EXT` and its `pNext` is defined as a `nullptr`.

Each of the mentioned extension structure instances were defined in the header and initialized in function `initialize_device_memory_properties()`.

== UI Overlay: Memory properties

image::./images/memory_budget_ui_overlay.png[Sample]

In application's UI overlay, total memory usage and total memory budget will be displayed.
In addition, by pressing down the arrow next to the "`Memory Heap Details`" tab, it expands a list of all memory usages and budgets from the heap count.
Where all memory properties were converted and displayed in proper units (e.g.,`kilobytes`, `megabytes`, etc.,).
Where:

[,cpp]
----
void MemoryBudget::on_update_ui_overlay(vkb::Drawer &drawer)
{
	converted_memory = update_converted_memory(device_memory_total_usage);
	drawer.text("Total Memory Usage: %.2f %s", converted_memory.data, converted_memory.units.c_str());
	converted_memory = update_converted_memory(device_memory_total_budget);
	drawer.text("Total Memory Budget: %.2f %s", converted_memory.data, converted_memory.units.c_str());

	if (drawer.header("Memory Heap Details"))
	{
		for (int i = 0; i < static_cast<int>(device_memory_heap_count); i++)
		{
			std::string header = "Memory Heap Index: " + std::to_string(i);
			if (drawer.header(header.c_str()))
			{
				converted_memory = update_converted_memory(physical_device_memory_budget_properties.heapUsage[i]);
				drawer.text("Usage: %.2f %s", converted_memory.data, converted_memory.units.c_str());

				converted_memory = update_converted_memory(physical_device_memory_budget_properties.heapBudget[i]);
				drawer.text("Budget: %.2f %s", converted_memory.data, converted_memory.units.c_str());

				drawer.text("Heap Flag: %s", read_memoryHeap_flags(device_memory_properties.memoryProperties.memoryHeaps[i].flags).c_str());
			}
		}
	}
}
----

The function `update_device_memory_properties()` measures and updates all memory properties related variables, by calling the `vkGetPhysicalDeviceMemoryProperties2()` and evaluating the `device_memory_total_usage` and `device_memory_total_budget`, where:

[,cpp]
----
void MemoryBudget::update_device_memory_properties()
{
	vkGetPhysicalDeviceMemoryProperties2(get_device().get_gpu().get_handle(), &device_memory_properties);
	device_memory_heap_count = device_memory_properties.memoryProperties.memoryHeapCount;
	device_memory_total_usage = 0;
	device_memory_total_budget = 0;
	for (uint32_t i = 0; i < device_memory_heap_count; i++)
	{
		device_memory_total_usage += physical_device_memory_budget_properties.heapUsage[i];
		device_memory_total_budget += physical_device_memory_budget_properties.heapBudget[i];
	}
}
----

And the function `update_device_memory_properties()` is assigned to the `prepare_instance_data()`.
Which, in this sample it will only need to be called once after everything was ready in the `prepare_instance_data()`, and before it returns `true`.

Commit message:

Add higlighted block with link to the github source for each sample
The block uses a define, so it's only visible from within Antora

samples/extensions/memory_budget/README.adoc, after:

////
- Copyright (c) 2023, Holochip Corporation
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
////
= Memory Budget extended features

ifdef::site-gen-antora[]
TIP: The source for this sample can be found in the https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples/tree/main/samples/extensions/memory_budget[Khronos Vulkan samples github repository].
endif::[]


This sample demonstrates how to incorporate the Vulkan memory budget extension.
Memory budget extension helps users to sample the memory budget consumption on each heap from the `physical device`, and is able to tell the `property flag` for each heap.
Which is a proper debug tool to visualize the memory consumption in run-time.

== Memory budget extension

In order to enable usage of memory budget extension features, an instance extension and a device extension were introduced in the constructor of the `MemoryBudget` class, where:

[,cpp]
----
add_instance_extension(VK_KHR_GET_PHYSICAL_DEVICE_PROPERTIES_2_EXTENSION_NAME);
add_device_extension(VK_EXT_MEMORY_BUDGET_EXTENSION_NAME);
----

Memory properties related structure instances were defined and initialized in the header of the `MemoryBudget` class, listed as follows:

[,cpp]
----
VkPhysicalDeviceMemoryBudgetPropertiesEXT physical_device_memory_budget_properties{};
VkPhysicalDeviceMemoryProperties2 device_memory_properties{};
----

Where, the `sType` and `pNext` variables were defined inside the `initialize_device_memory_properties()` function, such that:

[,cpp]
----
void MemoryBudget::initialize_device_memory_properties()
{
	// Initialize physical device memory budget properties structures variables
	physical_device_memory_budget_properties.sType = VK_STRUCTURE_TYPE_PHYSICAL_DEVICE_MEMORY_BUDGET_PROPERTIES_EXT;
	physical_device_memory_budget_properties.pNext = nullptr;
	// Initialize physical device memory properties structure variables
	device_memory_properties.sType = VK_STRUCTURE_TYPE_PHYSICAL_DEVICE_MEMORY_PROPERTIES_2;
	device_memory_properties.pNext = &physical_device_memory_budget_properties;
}
----

The `sType` of `device_memory_properties` is defined as `VK_STRUCTURE_TYPE_PHYSICAL_DEVICE_MEMORY_PROPERTIES_2`, and its `pNext` chained in a pointer of the structure instance `physical_device_memory_budget_properties`.
Where, the `sType` of `physical_device_memory_budget_properties` is defined as `VK_STRUCTURE_TYPE_PHYSICAL_DEVICE_MEMORY_BUDGET_PROPERTIES_EXT` and its `pNext` is defined as a `nullptr`.

Each of the mentioned extension structure instances were defined in the header and initialized in function `initialize_device_memory_properties()`.

== UI Overlay: Memory properties

image::./images/memory_budget_ui_overlay.png[Sample]

In application's UI overlay, total memory usage and total memory budget will be displayed.
In addition, by pressing down the arrow next to the "`Memory Heap Details`" tab, it expands a list of all memory usages and budgets from the heap count.
Where all memory properties were converted and displayed in proper units (e.g.,`kilobytes`, `megabytes`, etc.,).
Where:

[,cpp]
----
void MemoryBudget::on_update_ui_overlay(vkb::Drawer &drawer)
{
	converted_memory = update_converted_memory(device_memory_total_usage);
	drawer.text("Total Memory Usage: %.2f %s", converted_memory.data, converted_memory.units.c_str());
	converted_memory = update_converted_memory(device_memory_total_budget);
	drawer.text("Total Memory Budget: %.2f %s", converted_memory.data, converted_memory.units.c_str());

	if (drawer.header("Memory Heap Details"))
	{
		for (int i = 0; i < static_cast<int>(device_memory_heap_count); i++)
		{
			std::string header = "Memory Heap Index: " + std::to_string(i);
			if (drawer.header(header.c_str()))
			{
				converted_memory = update_converted_memory(physical_device_memory_budget_properties.heapUsage[i]);
				drawer.text("Usage: %.2f %s", converted_memory.data, converted_memory.units.c_str());

				converted_memory = update_converted_memory(physical_device_memory_budget_properties.heapBudget[i]);
				drawer.text("Budget: %.2f %s", converted_memory.data, converted_memory.units.c_str());

				drawer.text("Heap Flag: %s", read_memoryHeap_flags(device_memory_properties.memoryProperties.memoryHeaps[i].flags).c_str());
			}
		}
	}
}
----

The function `update_device_memory_properties()` measures and updates all memory properties related variables, by calling the `vkGetPhysicalDeviceMemoryProperties2()` and evaluating the `device_memory_total_usage` and `device_memory_total_budget`, where:

[,cpp]
----
void MemoryBudget::update_device_memory_properties()
{
	vkGetPhysicalDeviceMemoryProperties2(get_device().get_gpu().get_handle(), &device_memory_properties);
	device_memory_heap_count = device_memory_properties.memoryProperties.memoryHeapCount;
	device_memory_total_usage = 0;
	device_memory_total_budget = 0;
	for (uint32_t i = 0; i < device_memory_heap_count; i++)
	{
		device_memory_total_usage += physical_device_memory_budget_properties.heapUsage[i];
		device_memory_total_budget += physical_device_memory_budget_properties.heapBudget[i];
	}
}
----

And the function `update_device_memory_properties()` is assigned to the `prepare_instance_data()`.
Which, in this sample it will only need to be called once after everything was ready in the `prepare_instance_data()`, and before it returns `true`.
