samples/extensions/ray_queries/README.adoc, before:

////
- Copyright (c) 2020-2023, The Khronos Group
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
////

=== Basic ray queries

*Extensions*: https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.2-extensions/html/vkspec.html#VK_KHR_ray_query[`VK_KHR_ray_query`], https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.2-extensions/html/vkspec.html#VK_KHR_acceleration_structure[`VK_KHR_acceleration_structure`]

Render a sponza scene using the ray query extension.
Shows how to set up all data structures required for ray queries, including the bottom and top level acceleration structures for the geometry and a standard vertex/fragment shader pipeline.
Shadows are cast dynamically by ray queries being cast by the fragment shader.

Commit message:

Add higlighted block with link to the github source for each sample
The block uses a define, so it's only visible from within Antora

samples/extensions/ray_queries/README.adoc, after:

////
- Copyright (c) 2020-2023, The Khronos Group
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
////

=== Basic ray queries

ifdef::site-gen-antora[]
TIP: The source for this sample can be found in the https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples/tree/main/samples/extensions/ray_queries[Khronos Vulkan samples github repository].
endif::[]


*Extensions*: https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.2-extensions/html/vkspec.html#VK_KHR_ray_query[`VK_KHR_ray_query`], https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.2-extensions/html/vkspec.html#VK_KHR_acceleration_structure[`VK_KHR_acceleration_structure`]

Render a sponza scene using the ray query extension.
Shows how to set up all data structures required for ray queries, including the bottom and top level acceleration structures for the geometry and a standard vertex/fragment shader pipeline.
Shadows are cast dynamically by ray queries being cast by the fragment shader.
