samples/extensions/fragment_shading_rate/README.adoc, before:

////
- Copyright (c) 2019-2023, The Khronos Group
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
////

=== Fragment shading rate

*Extension*: https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.2-extensions/man/html/VK_KHR_fragment_shading_rate.html[`VK_KHR_fragment_shading_rate`]

Uses a special framebuffer attachment to control fragment shading rates for different framebuffer regions.
This allows explicit control over the number of fragment shader invocations for each pixel covered by a fragment, which is e.g.
useful for foveated rendering.

Commit message:

Add higlighted block with link to the github source for each sample
The block uses a define, so it's only visible from within Antora

samples/extensions/fragment_shading_rate/README.adoc, after:

////
- Copyright (c) 2019-2023, The Khronos Group
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
////

=== Fragment shading rate

ifdef::site-gen-antora[]
TIP: The source for this sample can be found in the https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples/tree/main/samples/extensions/fragment_shading_rate[Khronos Vulkan samples github repository].
endif::[]


*Extension*: https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.2-extensions/man/html/VK_KHR_fragment_shading_rate.html[`VK_KHR_fragment_shading_rate`]

Uses a special framebuffer attachment to control fragment shading rates for different framebuffer regions.
This allows explicit control over the number of fragment shader invocations for each pixel covered by a fragment, which is e.g.
useful for foveated rendering.
