samples/api/oit_linked_lists/README.adoc, before:

////
- Copyright (c) 2023, Google
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
////

= Order-independent transparency with per-pixel ordered linked lists

ifdef::site-gen-antora[]
TIP: The source for this sample can be found in the https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples/tree/main/samples/api/oit_linked_lists[Khronos Vulkan samples github repository].
endif::[]

:pp: {plus}{plus}

image::./images/sample.png[Sample]

== Overview

This sample implements an order-independent transparency (OIT) algorithm using per-pixel ordered linked lists.
It renders 64 spheres with random color and opacity (from 0.2 to 1.0).
It produces pixel-perfert results.

== Algorithm

The OIT algorithm consists of two passes: the _gather_ pass and the _combine_ pass.

During the gather pass, the transparent geometry is rendered per-pixel order linked lists.
Each fragment color and depth is pushed into the linked list associated with its destination pixel.
The linked lists head are stored into a storage image that is the size of the screen.
The fragment data (color and depth) is stored into a storage buffer shared by all linked lists.

The _combine_ pass is a screen-space operation.
For each pixel, it sorts the fragments stored in the linked list of that pixel.
It then alpha blends (in the shader code) them to produce the final transparent color and coverage.
Finally, it alpha blends (via the fixed blend function) the transparent color into the backbuffer.

The algorithm can produce pixel-perfect results, even with intersecting geometry.
However, for this sample, the maximum number of sorted fragments per-pixel is kept at 16.

The sample has an option to disable the fragment sorting.
It is meant to demonstrate the visual issues that occur with non-sorted transparent geometry.

== Requirements

The sample requires _fragmentStoresAndAtomics_ from VkPhysicalDeviceFeatures.

== Tests

This sample was tested on Windows.
The validation layers were enabled and all reported issues were fixed.
The sample was also tested on Linux during development.
Both systems featured an AMD GPU.

Commit message:

- Added camera auto-rotation option - Added filtered colour blending - Added an option section in the README - Fixed typos in the README - Fixed files with a mix of tab/spaces

samples/api/oit_linked_lists/README.adoc, after:

////
- Copyright (c) 2023, Google
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
////

= Order-independent transparency with per-pixel ordered linked lists

ifdef::site-gen-antora[]
TIP: The source for this sample can be found in the https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples/tree/main/samples/api/oit_linked_lists[Khronos Vulkan samples github repository].
endif::[]

:pp: {plus}{plus}

image::./images/sample.png[Sample]

== Overview

This sample implements an order-independent transparency (OIT) algorithm using per-pixel ordered linked lists.
It renders 64 spheres with random color and opacity (from 0.2 to 1.0).
It produces pixel-perfect results.

== Algorithm

The OIT algorithm consists of two passes: the _gather_ pass and the _combine_ pass.

During the gather pass, the transparent geometry is rendered into per-pixel order linked lists.
Each fragment color and depth is pushed into the linked list associated with its destination pixel.
The linked lists head are stored into a storage image that is the size of the screen.
The fragment data (color and depth) is stored into a storage buffer shared by all linked lists.

The _combine_ pass is a screen-space operation.
For each pixel, it sorts the fragments stored in the linked list of that pixel.
It then alpha blends (in the shader code) them to produce the final transparent color and coverage.
Finally, it alpha blends (via the fixed blend function) the transparent color into the backbuffer.

The algorithm can produce pixel-perfect results, even with intersecting geometry.
However, for this sample, the maximum number of sorted fragments per-pixel is kept at 16.

== Options

[cols="2,4,4"]
|===
| Option | Description | Comments

| Sort fragments
| Enable fragment sorting in the combine pass
| This option, when disabled, is meant to demonstrate the visual issues that occur with non-sorted transparent geometry.

| Camera auto-rotation
| Enable the automatic rotation of the camera
| 

| Filtered blending
| Switch to filtered colour blending, instead of the default alpha blending
| This option demonstrates that, as the blending of the transparency geometry is done in the shader, it is possible to use custom blending equations not supported by the fixed hardware.

|===

== Requirements

The sample requires _fragmentStoresAndAtomics_ from VkPhysicalDeviceFeatures.

== Tests

This sample was tested on Windows.
The validation layers were enabled and all reported issues were fixed.
The sample was also tested on Linux during development.
Both systems featured an AMD GPU.
