samples/extensions/color_write_enable/README.adoc, before:

////
- Copyright (c) 2023, Mobica Limited
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
////
= Color write enable

== Overview

This sample demonstrates how to use the `VK_EXT_color_write_enable` extension.
This extension allows to toggle the output color attachments using a pipeline dynamic state.
It allows the program to prepare an additional framebuffer populated with the data from a defined color blend attachment which can be blended dynamically to the final scene.

The final results are comparable to those obtained with `vkCmdSetColorWriteMaskEXT`, but it does not require the GPU driver to support `VK_EXT_extended_dynamic_state3`.

== How to use in Vulkan

To use this feature, the device extension VK_EXT_COLOR_WRITE_ENABLE_EXTENSION_NAME has to be enabled.
Support of this feature can be queried by extending the struct VkPhysicalDeviceFeatures2 in the vkGetPhysicalDeviceFeatures2 call by a VkPhysicalDeviceColorWriteEnableFeaturesEXT struct.
`VkPipelineColorWriteCreateInfoEXT` contains an array of Boolean values that serve as toggles for the corresponding `VkPipelineColorBlendAttachmentState`.
This array can be overwritten dynamically with the `vkCmdSetColorWriteEnableEXT` function.

Two subpasses are performed in the sample.
In the first subpass, three attachments are used.
Each attachment has only one color component bit enabled - R, G and B.
A triangle is drawn on each of them separately.
The second subpass combines three images created in the previous pass.
Checkboxes are used to toggle the `vkCmdSetColorWriteEnableEXT` function disabling each attachment.
As a result of its disabling, the value of a given channel is set as the value of that channel in the background color.
Sliders are used to set the background color.

== The sample

The sample shows how to setup an application to work with this extension:

* How to enable the extension.
* How to set up multiple color attachments in the color blend state.
* How to set up the render subpass and framebuffers for multiple color attachments.
* How to write a fragment shader with multiple outputs.

== Documentation links

https://registry.khronos.org/vulkan/specs/1.3-extensions/man/html/VK_EXT_color_write_enable.html

https://registry.khronos.org/vulkan/specs/1.3-extensions/man/html/VkSubpassDescription.html

https://registry.khronos.org/vulkan/specs/1.3-extensions/man/html/VkFramebufferCreateInfo.html

== See also

https://registry.khronos.org/vulkan/specs/1.3-extensions/man/html/vkCmdSetColorWriteMaskEXT.html

Commit message:

Add higlighted block with link to the github source for each sample
The block uses a define, so it's only visible from within Antora

samples/extensions/color_write_enable/README.adoc, after:

////
- Copyright (c) 2023, Mobica Limited
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
////
= Color write enable

ifdef::site-gen-antora[]
TIP: The source for this sample can be found in the https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples/tree/main/samples/extensions/color_write_enable[Khronos Vulkan samples github repository].
endif::[]


== Overview

This sample demonstrates how to use the `VK_EXT_color_write_enable` extension.
This extension allows to toggle the output color attachments using a pipeline dynamic state.
It allows the program to prepare an additional framebuffer populated with the data from a defined color blend attachment which can be blended dynamically to the final scene.

The final results are comparable to those obtained with `vkCmdSetColorWriteMaskEXT`, but it does not require the GPU driver to support `VK_EXT_extended_dynamic_state3`.

== How to use in Vulkan

To use this feature, the device extension VK_EXT_COLOR_WRITE_ENABLE_EXTENSION_NAME has to be enabled.
Support of this feature can be queried by extending the struct VkPhysicalDeviceFeatures2 in the vkGetPhysicalDeviceFeatures2 call by a VkPhysicalDeviceColorWriteEnableFeaturesEXT struct.
`VkPipelineColorWriteCreateInfoEXT` contains an array of Boolean values that serve as toggles for the corresponding `VkPipelineColorBlendAttachmentState`.
This array can be overwritten dynamically with the `vkCmdSetColorWriteEnableEXT` function.

Two subpasses are performed in the sample.
In the first subpass, three attachments are used.
Each attachment has only one color component bit enabled - R, G and B.
A triangle is drawn on each of them separately.
The second subpass combines three images created in the previous pass.
Checkboxes are used to toggle the `vkCmdSetColorWriteEnableEXT` function disabling each attachment.
As a result of its disabling, the value of a given channel is set as the value of that channel in the background color.
Sliders are used to set the background color.

== The sample

The sample shows how to setup an application to work with this extension:

* How to enable the extension.
* How to set up multiple color attachments in the color blend state.
* How to set up the render subpass and framebuffers for multiple color attachments.
* How to write a fragment shader with multiple outputs.

== Documentation links

https://registry.khronos.org/vulkan/specs/1.3-extensions/man/html/VK_EXT_color_write_enable.html

https://registry.khronos.org/vulkan/specs/1.3-extensions/man/html/VkSubpassDescription.html

https://registry.khronos.org/vulkan/specs/1.3-extensions/man/html/VkFramebufferCreateInfo.html

== See also

https://registry.khronos.org/vulkan/specs/1.3-extensions/man/html/vkCmdSetColorWriteMaskEXT.html
