samples/performance/render_passes/render_passes_tutorial.md, before:

<!--
- Copyright (c) 2019, Arm Limited and Contributors
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
-->

# Appropriate use of render pass attachments

## Overview

Vulkan render-passes use attachments to describe input and output render targets. This sample shows how loading and storing attachments might affect performance on mobile.

During the creation of a render-pass, you can specify various color attachments and a depth-stencil attachment. Each of those is described by a [`VkAttachmentDescription`](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.1-extensions/man/html/VkAttachmentDescription.html) struct, which contains attributes to specify the [load operation](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.1-extensions/man/html/VkAttachmentLoadOp.html) (`loadOp`) and the [store operation](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.1-extensions/man/html/VkAttachmentStoreOp.html) (`storeOp`). This sample lets you choose between different combinations of these operations at runtime.

```c
VkAttachmentDescription desc = {};
desc.loadOp  = VK_ATTACHMENT_LOAD_OP_*;
desc.storeOp = VK_ATTACHMENT_STORE_OP_*;
```

## Color attachment load operation

The sample renders a scene with a render-pass using one color attachment, which is a swapchain image used for presentation. Since we do not need to read its content at the beginning of the pass, it would make sense to use `LOAD_OP_DONT_CARE` in order to avoid spending time loading it.

If we do not draw on the entire framebuffer, the frame might show random colors on the areas we do not draw on. In addition, it would show pixels drawn during previous frames. The solution consists in using `LOAD_OP_CLEAR` to clear the content of the framebuffer using a user-specified color.

```c
VkAttachmentDescription color_desc = {};
color_desc.loadOp = VK_ATTACHMENT_LOAD_OP_CLEAR;

// Remember to set the clear value when beginning the render pass
VkClearValue clear = {};
clear.color = {0.5f, 0.5f, 0.5f, 1.0f};

VkRenderPassBeginInfo begin = {};
begin.clearValueCount = 1;
begin.pClearValues    = &clear;
```

Using the `LOAD_OP_LOAD` flag is the wrong choice in this case. Not only do we not use its content during this render-pass, it will cost us more in terms of bandwidth.

Below is a screenshot showing a scene rendered using `LOAD_OP_LOAD`. We can estimate the bandwidth cost of loading/storing an uncompressed attachment as `width * height * bpp/8 * FPS [MiB/s]`. In this case we get an estimate of `2220 * 1080 * (32/8) * 61.7 = 591 MiB/s`.

![Using LOAD_OP_LOAD](load_store.jpg)

Comparing the read bandwidth values, we observe a difference of `5099.5 - 4453.8 = 645 MiB/s` if we select `LOAD_OP_CLEAR`:

![Using LOAD_OP_CLEAR](clear_store.jpg)

The savings will be lower if the images are compressed, see [Enabling AFBC in your Vulkan Application](../afbc/afbc_tutorial.md).

## Depth attachment store operation

The render-pass also uses a depth attachment. In case we need to use it in a second render-pass, the right operation to set would be `STORE_OP_STORE`, because choosing `STORE_OP_DONT_CARE` means that the second render-pass will potentially load the wrong values. The sample does not have a second render-pass, therefore there is no need to store the depth attachment.

```c
VkAttachmentDescription depth_desc = {};
depth_desc.storeOp = VK_ATTACHMENT_STORE_OP_DONT_CARE;
```

It is worth noticing that we can create a depth image with the `LAZILY_ALLOCATED` memory property, which means that it will be allocated by tile-based GPUs only if it is actually stored (by using `STORE_OP_STORE`).

```c
VmaAllocationCreateInfo depth_alloc = {};
depth_alloc.preferredFlags = VK_MEMORY_PROPERTY_LAZILY_ALLOCATED_BIT;
```

![Using LOAD_OP_CLEAR and STORE_OP_DONT_CARE](clear_dont_care.jpg)

In this case the write transactions were reduced by `769.6 - 239.5 = 530 MiB/s`, again what we would roughly expect from storing the size of an uncompressed image at ~60 FPS.

![Streamline](render_passes_streamline.png)

The streamline trace shows us a more in-depth analysis of what is going on in the GPU. The delta between `LOAD_OP_LOAD` and `LOAD_OP_CLEAR` is evident at 10.4s having consistently less external reads. The delta between `STORE_OP_STORE` and `STORE_OP_DONT_CARE` is clear at 18.1s with the external write graphs plunging down.

## Depth image usage

Beyond setting the depth image usage bit to specify that it can be used as a `DEPTH_STENCIL_ATTACHMENT`, we can set the `TRANSIENT_ATTACHMENT` bit to tell the GPU that it can be used as a transient attachment which will only live for the duration of a single render-pass. Then if this is backed by `LAZILY_ALLOCATED` memory it will not even need physical storage.

```c
VkImageCreateInfo depth_info = {VK_STRUCTURE_TYPE_IMAGE_CREATE_INFO};
depth_info.usage = VK_IMAGE_USAGE_TRANSIENT_ATTACHMENT_BIT;
```

## Best-practice summary

**Do**

* Clear or invalidate each attachment at the start of a render pass using `loadOp = LOAD_OP_CLEAR` or `loadOp = LOAD_OP_DONT_CARE`.
* Ensure that color/depth/stencil writes are not masked when clearing; you must clear the entire content of an attachment to get a fast clear of the tile memory.
* Set the `VK_ATTACHMENT_LOAD_OP_DONT_CARE` flag to attachments not used as input for the render-pass.
* Set up any attachment which is only live for the duration of a single render pass as a `TRANSIENT_ATTACHMENT` backed by `LAZILY_ALLOCATED` memory and ensure that the contents are invalidated at the end of the render pass using `storeOp = STORE_OP_DONT_CARE`.
* If you know you are rendering to a sub-region of framebuffer use a scissor box to restrict the area of clearing and rendering required.

**Don't**

* Use `vkCmdClearColorImage()` or `vkCmdClearDepthStencilImage()` for any image which is used inside a render pass later; move the clear to the render pass `loadOp` setting.
* Use `vkCmdClearAttachments()` inside a render pass when not needed as this is not free, unlike a clear or invalidate load operation.
* Clear a render pass by manually writing a constant color using a shader program.
* Use `loadOp = LOAD_OP_LOAD` unless your algorithm actually relies on the initial framebuffer state.
* Set `loadOp` or `storeOp` for attachments which are not actually needed in the render pass; you'll generate a needless round-trip via tile-memory for that attachment.
* Use `vkCmdBlitImage` as a way of upscaling a low-resolution game frame to native resolution if you will render UI/HUD directly on top of it with `loadOp = LOAD_OP_LOAD`; this will be an unnecessary round-trip to memory.

**Impact**

* Correct handling of render passes is critical; failing to follow this advice can result in significantly lower fragment shading performance and increased memory bandwidth due to the need to read non-cleared attachments into the tile memory at the start of rendering and write out non-invalidated attachments at the end of rendering.

**Debugging**

* Review API usage of [attachments description](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.1-extensions/man/html/VkAttachmentDescription.html).
* Review API usage of [render pass creation](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.1-extensions/man/html/vkCreateRenderPass.html), and any use of [`vkCmdClearColorImage()`](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.1-extensions/man/html/vkCmdClearColorImage.html), [`vkCmdClearDepthStencilImage()`](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.1-extensions/man/html/vkCmdClearDepthStencilImage.html) and [`vkCmdClearAttachments()`](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.1-extensions/man/html/vkCmdClearAttachments.html).

Commit message:

Arm updates to samples and framework
Samples

- Descriptor set management sample highlighting:
  - Benefits of descriptor set caching
  - Approaches to buffer management
- Updated Command buffer usage sample:
  - Multi-threaded command buffer recording
  - Toggle between single primary command buffer or adjustable number of secondaries
- Updated Render Subpasses sample:
  - Define lights in the sample not the shader
- Updated Render Passes sample:
  - Adds the ability to toggle the use of vkCmdClear
- Updated AFBC sample:
  - Added a list of supported formats to the tutorial
  - Fixed a bug where AFBC would never be disabled via the sample checkbox
- Updated Surface Rotation sample:
  - Refactored code and documentation
  - Updated tutorial screenshots and code snippets

Framework

- Implemented benchmark mode
- Screenshot was made much faster by using GPU_TO_CPU memory
- Composite counters such as cache miss ratio and branch miss ratio are now supported
- Mulithreaded rendering, where command recording is thread-safe
- Gltf Loader supports extension loading, and the scene graph now can support lights loaded in from KHR_lights_punctual

Bugfix

- Fixed a bug which prevented the creation of the output directory on Android
- Fixed a bug with batch mode in portrait orientation
- Avoid loss of precision in the projection matrix to reduce flickering
- Fixed a bug with rotation in surface rotation sample

Other

- Added tutorial to find the driver version of the GPU
- Various bug fixes and improvements

samples/performance/render_passes/render_passes_tutorial.md, after:

<!--
- Copyright (c) 2019, Arm Limited and Contributors
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
-->

# Appropriate use of render pass attachments

## Overview

Vulkan render-passes use attachments to describe input and output render targets. This sample shows how loading and storing attachments might affect performance on mobile.

During the creation of a render-pass, you can specify various color attachments and a depth-stencil attachment. Each of those is described by a [`VkAttachmentDescription`](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.1-extensions/man/html/VkAttachmentDescription.html) struct, which contains attributes to specify the [load operation](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.1-extensions/man/html/VkAttachmentLoadOp.html) (`loadOp`) and the [store operation](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.1-extensions/man/html/VkAttachmentStoreOp.html) (`storeOp`). This sample lets you choose between different combinations of these operations at runtime.

```c
VkAttachmentDescription desc = {};
desc.loadOp  = VK_ATTACHMENT_LOAD_OP_*;
desc.storeOp = VK_ATTACHMENT_STORE_OP_*;
```

## Color attachment load operation

The sample renders a scene with a render-pass using one color attachment, which is a swapchain image used for presentation. Since we do not need to read its content at the beginning of the pass, it would make sense to use `LOAD_OP_DONT_CARE` in order to avoid spending time loading it.

If we do not draw on the entire framebuffer, the frame might show random colors on the areas we do not draw on. In addition, it would show pixels drawn during previous frames. The solution consists in using `LOAD_OP_CLEAR` to clear the content of the framebuffer using a user-specified color.

```c
VkAttachmentDescription color_desc = {};
color_desc.loadOp = VK_ATTACHMENT_LOAD_OP_CLEAR;

// Remember to set the clear value when beginning the render pass
VkClearValue clear = {};
clear.color = {0.5f, 0.5f, 0.5f, 1.0f};

VkRenderPassBeginInfo begin = {};
begin.clearValueCount = 1;
begin.pClearValues    = &clear;
```

Using the `LOAD_OP_LOAD` flag is the wrong choice in this case. Not only do we not use its content during this render-pass, it will cost us more in terms of bandwidth.

Below is a screenshot showing a scene rendered using `LOAD_OP_LOAD`. We can estimate the bandwidth cost of loading/storing an uncompressed attachment as `width * height * bpp/8 * FPS [MiB/s]`. Considering we are using triple buffering, we calculate an estimate of `2220 * 1080 * (32/8) * ~60 = ~575 MiB/s`, and multiplying it by `3` we obtain a value close to the _External Read Bytes_ shown in the graph.

![Using LOAD_OP_LOAD](images/load_store.jpg)

Comparing the read bandwidth values, we observe a difference of `1533.9 - 933.7 = 600.2 MiB/s` if we select `LOAD_OP_CLEAR`. The savings will be lower if the images are compressed, see [Enabling AFBC in your Vulkan Application](../afbc/afbc_tutorial.md).

![Using LOAD_OP_CLEAR](images/clear_store.jpg)

## Depth attachment store operation

The render-pass also uses a depth attachment. In case we need to use it in a second render-pass, the right operation to set would be `STORE_OP_STORE`, because choosing `STORE_OP_DONT_CARE` means that the second render-pass will potentially load the wrong values. The sample does not have a second render-pass, therefore there is no need to store the depth attachment.

```c
VkAttachmentDescription depth_desc = {};
depth_desc.storeOp = VK_ATTACHMENT_STORE_OP_DONT_CARE;
```

It is worth noticing that we can create a depth image with the `LAZILY_ALLOCATED` memory property, which means that it will be allocated by tile-based GPUs only if it is actually stored (by using `STORE_OP_STORE`).

```c
VmaAllocationCreateInfo depth_alloc = {};
depth_alloc.preferredFlags = VK_MEMORY_PROPERTY_LAZILY_ALLOCATED_BIT;
```

![Using LOAD_OP_CLEAR and STORE_OP_DONT_CARE](images/clear_dont_care.jpg)

In this case the write transactions were reduced by `986.3 - 431.5 = 554.8 MiB/s`, again what we would roughly expect from storing the size of an uncompressed image at ~60 FPS.

The streamline trace shows us a more in-depth analysis of what is going on in the GPU. The delta between `LOAD_OP_LOAD` and `LOAD_OP_CLEAR` is evident at 10.4s having consistently less external reads. The delta between `STORE_OP_STORE` and `STORE_OP_DONT_CARE` is clear at 18.1s with the external write graphs plunging down.

![Streamline](images/render_passes_streamline.png)

As a side note, bear in mind that calling `vkCmdClear*` to clear the attachments is not needed as you can get the same result by using `LOAD_OP_CLEAR`. The following screenshot shows that by using that command the GPU will need `~6` million more fragment cycles per second.

![vkCmdClear](images/vk_cmd_clear.png)

## Depth image usage

Beyond setting the depth image usage bit to specify that it can be used as a `DEPTH_STENCIL_ATTACHMENT`, we can set the `TRANSIENT_ATTACHMENT` bit to tell the GPU that it can be used as a transient attachment which will only live for the duration of a single render-pass. Then if this is backed by `LAZILY_ALLOCATED` memory it will not even need physical storage.

```c
VkImageCreateInfo depth_info = {VK_STRUCTURE_TYPE_IMAGE_CREATE_INFO};
depth_info.usage = VK_IMAGE_USAGE_TRANSIENT_ATTACHMENT_BIT;
```

## Best-practice summary

**Do**

* Clear or invalidate each attachment at the start of a render pass using `loadOp = LOAD_OP_CLEAR` or `loadOp = LOAD_OP_DONT_CARE`.
* Ensure that color/depth/stencil writes are not masked when clearing; you must clear the entire content of an attachment to get a fast clear of the tile memory.
* Set the `VK_ATTACHMENT_LOAD_OP_DONT_CARE` flag to attachments not used as input for the render-pass.
* Set up any attachment which is only live for the duration of a single render pass as a `TRANSIENT_ATTACHMENT` backed by `LAZILY_ALLOCATED` memory and ensure that the contents are invalidated at the end of the render pass using `storeOp = STORE_OP_DONT_CARE`.
* If you know you are rendering to a sub-region of framebuffer use a scissor box to restrict the area of clearing and rendering required.

**Don't**

* Use `vkCmdClearColorImage()` or `vkCmdClearDepthStencilImage()` for any image which is used inside a render pass later; move the clear to the render pass `loadOp` setting.
* Use `vkCmdClearAttachments()` inside a render pass when not needed as this is not free, unlike a clear or invalidate load operation.
* Clear a render pass by manually writing a constant color using a shader program.
* Use `loadOp = LOAD_OP_LOAD` unless your algorithm actually relies on the initial framebuffer state.
* Set `loadOp` or `storeOp` for attachments which are not actually needed in the render pass; you'll generate a needless round-trip via tile-memory for that attachment.
* Use `vkCmdBlitImage` as a way of upscaling a low-resolution game frame to native resolution if you will render UI/HUD directly on top of it with `loadOp = LOAD_OP_LOAD`; this will be an unnecessary round-trip to memory.

**Impact**

* Correct handling of render passes is critical; failing to follow this advice can result in significantly lower fragment shading performance and increased memory bandwidth due to the need to read non-cleared attachments into the tile memory at the start of rendering and write out non-invalidated attachments at the end of rendering.

**Debugging**

* Review API usage of [attachments description](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.1-extensions/man/html/VkAttachmentDescription.html).
* Review API usage of [render pass creation](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.1-extensions/man/html/vkCreateRenderPass.html), and any use of [`vkCmdClearColorImage()`](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.1-extensions/man/html/vkCmdClearColorImage.html), [`vkCmdClearDepthStencilImage()`](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.1-extensions/man/html/vkCmdClearDepthStencilImage.html) and [`vkCmdClearAttachments()`](https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.1-extensions/man/html/vkCmdClearAttachments.html).
