samples/extensions/synchronization_2/README.adoc, before:

////
- Copyright (c) 2020-2023, The Khronos Group
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
////

=== Synchronization2

*Extension* https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.2-extensions/html/vkspec.html#VK_KHR_synchronization2[`VK_KHR_synchronization2`]

Demonstrates the use of the reworked synchronization api introduced with `VK_KHR_synchronization2`.
Based on the compute shading N-Body particle system, this sample uses the new extension to streamline the memory barriers used for the compute and graphics work submissions.

Commit message:

Add higlighted block with link to the github source for each sample
The block uses a define, so it's only visible from within Antora

samples/extensions/synchronization_2/README.adoc, after:

////
- Copyright (c) 2020-2023, The Khronos Group
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
////

=== Synchronization2

ifdef::site-gen-antora[]
TIP: The source for this sample can be found in the https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples/tree/main/samples/extensions/synchronization_2[Khronos Vulkan samples github repository].
endif::[]


*Extension* https://www.khronos.org/registry/vulkan/specs/1.2-extensions/html/vkspec.html#VK_KHR_synchronization2[`VK_KHR_synchronization2`]

Demonstrates the use of the reworked synchronization api introduced with `VK_KHR_synchronization2`.
Based on the compute shading N-Body particle system, this sample uses the new extension to streamline the memory barriers used for the compute and graphics work submissions.
