samples/extensions/calibrated_timestamps/README.adoc, before:

////
- Copyright (c) 2023, Holochip Corporation
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
////
= Calibrated Timestamps

This sample demonstrates the extension `VK_EXT_calibrated_timestamps`.
The calibrated timestamps profiles any given portion of code, unlike timestamp queries, which only profiles an entire graphic queue.

== Overview

To enable the `VK_EXT_calibrated_timestamps` extension, `VK_KHR_get_physical_device_properties2` must be enabled.

== Introduction

This sample is built upon the framework of the Vulkan Sample `HDR`.
We demonstrate using calibrated timestamps  over the build_command_buffers function.

== * Time domain, timestamp, timestamp period, and max deviation

A timestamp is being sampled via the calibrated timestamp extension.
In general, one must take two timestamps in order to measure the time elapsed within a block of code.

Each time domain is different, and the measurement of their associated timestamp periods may vary.
The precision of timestamps is calibrated by max deviations.

== Get time domain and timestamps

A list of time domains can be extracted by using `vkGetPhysicalDeviceCalibrateableTimeDomainsEXT`.
And the Vulkan time domain is defined by the enum `VkTimeDomainEXT`

Commit message:

Add higlighted block with link to the github source for each sample
The block uses a define, so it's only visible from within Antora

samples/extensions/calibrated_timestamps/README.adoc, after:

////
- Copyright (c) 2023, Holochip Corporation
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
////
= Calibrated Timestamps

ifdef::site-gen-antora[]
TIP: The source for this sample can be found in the https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples/tree/main/samples/extensions/calibrated_timestamps[Khronos Vulkan samples github repository].
endif::[]


This sample demonstrates the extension `VK_EXT_calibrated_timestamps`.
The calibrated timestamps profiles any given portion of code, unlike timestamp queries, which only profiles an entire graphic queue.

== Overview

To enable the `VK_EXT_calibrated_timestamps` extension, `VK_KHR_get_physical_device_properties2` must be enabled.

== Introduction

This sample is built upon the framework of the Vulkan Sample `HDR`.
We demonstrate using calibrated timestamps  over the build_command_buffers function.

== * Time domain, timestamp, timestamp period, and max deviation

A timestamp is being sampled via the calibrated timestamp extension.
In general, one must take two timestamps in order to measure the time elapsed within a block of code.

Each time domain is different, and the measurement of their associated timestamp periods may vary.
The precision of timestamps is calibrated by max deviations.

== Get time domain and timestamps

A list of time domains can be extracted by using `vkGetPhysicalDeviceCalibrateableTimeDomainsEXT`.
And the Vulkan time domain is defined by the enum `VkTimeDomainEXT`
