samples/extensions/full_screen_exclusive/README.adoc, before:

////
- Copyright (c) 2023, Holochip Corporation
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
////
= Full Screen Exclusive

== Overview

This code sample demonstrates how to incorporate the Vulkan extension `VK_EXT_full_screen_exclusive`.
This extension provides a solution for the full screen exclusion issue on Windows prior to the 11 version.
Windows prior to 11 cannot correctly get an exclusive full screen window, `VK_EXT_full_screen_exclusive` is applicable on Windows prior to  version 11 platform alone.

== Introduction

This sample provides a detailed procedure to activate full screen exclusive mode on Windows applications.
Users can switch display modes from: 1) windowed, 2) borderless fullscreen, and 3) exclusive fullscreen using keyboard inputs.

== *Reminder

Configuring the `swapchain create info` using full screen exclusive extension *DOES NOT* automatically set the application window to full screen mode.
The following procedure shows how to activate full screen exclusive mode correctly:

1) recreate the `swapchain` using `full screen exclusive`.
2) recreate the `frame buffers` with the new `swapchain`.
3) configure the application window to *fullscreen mode* 4) execute the `acquire full screen exclusive EXT` call.

* More details can be found in the link:    https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/winuser/nf-winuser-monitorfromwindow[MonitorFromWindow function (winuser.h)]

Commit message:

Add higlighted block with link to the github source for each sample
The block uses a define, so it's only visible from within Antora

samples/extensions/full_screen_exclusive/README.adoc, after:

////
- Copyright (c) 2023, Holochip Corporation
-
- SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-
- Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 the "License";
- you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
- You may obtain a copy of the License at
-
-     http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
-
- Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
- distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
- WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
- See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
- limitations under the License.
-
////
= Full Screen Exclusive

ifdef::site-gen-antora[]
TIP: The source for this sample can be found in the https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples/tree/main/samples/extensions/full_screen_exclusive[Khronos Vulkan samples github repository].
endif::[]


== Overview

This code sample demonstrates how to incorporate the Vulkan extension `VK_EXT_full_screen_exclusive`.
This extension provides a solution for the full screen exclusion issue on Windows prior to the 11 version.
Windows prior to 11 cannot correctly get an exclusive full screen window, `VK_EXT_full_screen_exclusive` is applicable on Windows prior to  version 11 platform alone.

== Introduction

This sample provides a detailed procedure to activate full screen exclusive mode on Windows applications.
Users can switch display modes from: 1) windowed, 2) borderless fullscreen, and 3) exclusive fullscreen using keyboard inputs.

== *Reminder

Configuring the `swapchain create info` using full screen exclusive extension *DOES NOT* automatically set the application window to full screen mode.
The following procedure shows how to activate full screen exclusive mode correctly:

1) recreate the `swapchain` using `full screen exclusive`.
2) recreate the `frame buffers` with the new `swapchain`.
3) configure the application window to *fullscreen mode* 4) execute the `acquire full screen exclusive EXT` call.

* More details can be found in the link:    https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/winuser/nf-winuser-monitorfromwindow[MonitorFromWindow function (winuser.h)]
