docs/pull_request_template.md, before:

# Pull Request Template

## Description

Please include a summary of the change, new sample or fixed issue. Please also include relevant motivation and context.
Please read the [contribution guidelines](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples/tree/master/CONTRIBUTING.md)

## Checklist:

Do not submit your PR without all of the below being checked:

- [ ] My code follows the [coding style](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples/tree/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#Code-Style)
- [ ] I have performed a self-review of my own code
- [ ] I have commented my code, particularly in hard-to-understand areas
- [ ] I have made corresponding changes to the documentation
- [ ] I have tested my sample on at least one compliant Vulkan implementation
- [ ] I have stated on what implementation the sample has been tested so that others can test on different implementations and platforms
- [ ] My changes do not add any new compiler warnings
- [ ] Vulkan validation layer output is clean on at least one compliant implementation
- [ ] Any dependent changes (e.g. assets) have been merged and published in downstream modules
- [ ] I have used existing framework/helper functions where possible
- [ ] I have reviewed file [licenses](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples/tree/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#Copyright-Notice-and-License-Template)
- [ ] My changes build and run on Windows, Linux, macOS and Android. Otherwise I have [documented any exceptions](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples/tree/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#General-Requirements)

Commit message:

Add vendor-specific check to pull request checklist

docs/pull_request_template.md, after:

## Description

Please include a summary of the change, new sample or fixed issue. Please also include relevant motivation and context.
Please read the [contribution guidelines](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples/tree/master/CONTRIBUTING.md)

## Checklist:

Do not submit your PR without all of the below being checked:

- [ ] My code follows the [coding style](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples/tree/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#Code-Style)
- [ ] I have performed a self-review of my own code
- [ ] I have commented my code, particularly in hard-to-understand areas
- [ ] I have made corresponding changes to the documentation
- [ ] I have tested my sample on at least one compliant Vulkan implementation
- [ ] I have stated on what implementation the sample has been tested so that others can test on different implementations and platforms
- [ ] If my sample is vendor-specific, I have [tagged it appropriately](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples/tree/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#General-Requirements).
- [ ] My changes do not add any new compiler warnings
- [ ] Vulkan validation layer output is clean on at least one compliant implementation
- [ ] Any dependent changes (e.g. assets) have been merged and published in downstream modules
- [ ] I have used existing framework/helper functions where possible
- [ ] I have reviewed file [licenses](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples/tree/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#Copyright-Notice-and-License-Template)
- [ ] My changes build and run on Windows, Linux, macOS and Android. Otherwise I have [documented any exceptions](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Samples/tree/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#General-Requirements)
